1 The first duty prescribed by God for His servants is the recognition of
Him Who is the Dayspring of His Revelation and the Fountain of His laws,
Who representeth the Godhead in both the Kingdom of His Cause and the
world of creation. Whoso achieveth this duty hath attained unto all good;
and whoso is deprived thereof hath gone astray, though he be the author of
every righteous deed. It behoveth every one who reacheth this most sublime
station, this summit of transcendent glory, to observe every ordinance of
Him Who is the Desire of the world. These twin duties are inseparable.
Neither is acceptable without the other. Thus hath it been decreed by Him
Who is the Source of Divine inspiration.
2 They whom God hath endued with insight will readily recognize that the
precepts laid down by God constitute the highest means for the maintenance
of order in the world and the security of its peoples. He that turneth
away from them is accounted among the abject and foolish. We, verily, have
commanded you to refuse the dictates of your evil passions and corrupt
desires, and not to transgress the bounds which the Pen of the Most High
hath fixed, for these are the breath of life unto all created things. The
seas of Divine wisdom and Divine utterance have risen under the breath of
the breeze of the All-Merciful. Hasten to drink your fill, O men of
understanding! They that have violated the Covenant of God by breaking His
commandments, and have turned back on their heels, these have erred
grievously in the sight of God, the All-Possessing, the Most High.
3 O ye peoples of the world! Know assuredly that My commandments are the
lamps of My loving providence among My servants, and the keys of My mercy
for My creatures. Thus hath it been sent down from the heaven of the Will
of your Lord, the Lord of Revelation. Were any man to taste the sweetness
of the words which the lips of the All-Merciful have willed to utter, he
would, though the treasures of the earth be in his possession, renounce
them one and all, that he might vindicate the truth of even one of His
commandments, shining above the Dayspring of His bountiful care and
loving-kindness.
4 Say: From My laws the sweet-smelling savour of My garment can be
smelled, and by their aid the standards of Victory will be planted upon
the highest peaks. The Tongue of My power hath, from the heaven of My
omnipotent glory, addressed to My creation these words: "Observe My
commandments, for the love of My beauty." Happy is the lover that hath
inhaled the divine fragrance of his Best-Beloved from these words, laden
with the perfume of a grace which no tongue can describe. By My life! He
who hath drunk the choice wine of fairness from the hands of My bountiful
favour will circle around My commandments that shine above the Dayspring
of My creation.
5 Think not that We have revealed unto you a mere code of laws. Nay,
rather, We have unsealed the choice Wine with the fingers of might and
power. To this beareth witness that which the Pen of Revelation hath
revealed. Meditate upon this, O men of insight!
6 We have enjoined obligatory prayer upon you, with nine rak’áhs, to be
offered at noon and in the morning and the evening unto God, the Revealer
of Verses. We have relieved you of a greater number, as a command in the
Book of God. He, verily, is the Ordainer, the Omnipotent, the
Unrestrained. When ye desire to perform this prayer, turn ye towards the
Court of My Most Holy Presence, this Hallowed Spot that God hath made the
Centre round which circle the Concourse on High, and which He hath decreed
to be the Point of Adoration for the denizens of the Cities of Eternity,
and the Source of Command unto all that are in heaven and on earth; and
when the Sun of Truth and Utterance shall set, turn your faces towards the
Spot that We have ordained for you. He, verily, is Almighty and
Omniscient.
7 Everything that is hath come to be through His irresistible decree.
Whenever My laws appear like the sun in the heaven of Mine utterance, they
must be faithfully obeyed by all, though My decree be such as to cause the
heaven of every religion to be cleft asunder. He doeth what He pleaseth.
He chooseth, and none may question His choice. Whatsoever He, the
Well-Beloved, ordaineth, the same is, verily, beloved. To this He Who is
the Lord of all creation beareth Me witness. Whoso hath inhaled the sweet
fragrance of the All-Merciful, and recognized the Source of this
utterance, will welcome with his own eyes the shafts of the enemy, that he
may establish the truth of the laws of God amongst men. Well is it with
him that hath turned thereunto, and apprehended the meaning of His
decisive decree.
8 We have set forth the details of obligatory prayer in another Tablet.
Blessed is he who observeth that whereunto he hath been bidden by Him Who
ruleth over all mankind. In the Prayer for the Dead six specific passages
have been sent down by God, the Revealer of Verses. Let one who is able to
read recite that which hath been revealed to precede these passages; and
as for him who is unable, God hath relieved him of this requirement. He,
of a truth, is the Mighty, the Pardoner.
9 Hair doth not invalidate your prayer, nor aught from which the spirit
hath departed, such as bones and the like. Ye are free to wear the fur of
the sable as ye would that of the beaver, the squirrel, and other animals;
the prohibition of its use hath stemmed, not from the Qur’án, but from the
misconceptions of the divines. He, verily, is the All-Glorious, the
All-Knowing.
10 We have commanded you to pray and fast from the beginning of maturity;
this is ordained by God, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers. He
hath exempted from this those who are weak from illness or age, as a
bounty from His Presence, and He is the Forgiving, the Generous. God hath
granted you leave to prostrate yourselves on any surface that is clean,
for We have removed in this regard the limitation that had been laid down
in the Book; God, indeed, hath knowledge of that whereof ye know naught.
Let him that findeth no water for ablution repeat five times the words "In
the Name of God, the Most Pure, the Most Pure", and then proceed to his
devotions. Such is the command of the Lord of all worlds. In regions where
the days and nights grow long, let times of prayer be gauged by clocks and
other instruments that mark the passage of the hours. He, verily, is the
Expounder, the Wise.
11 We have absolved you from the requirement of performing the Prayer of
the Signs. On the appearance of fearful natural events call ye to mind the
might and majesty of your Lord, He Who heareth and seeth all, and say
"Dominion is God’s, the Lord of the seen and the unseen, the Lord of
creation".
12 It hath been ordained that obligatory prayer is to be performed by each
of you individually. Save in the Prayer for the Dead, the practice of
congregational prayer hath been annulled. He, of a truth, is the Ordainer,
the All-Wise.
13 God hath exempted women who are in their courses from obligatory prayer
and fasting. Let them, instead, after performance of their ablutions, give
praise unto God, repeating ninety-five times between the noon of one day
and the next "Glorified be God, the Lord of Splendour and Beauty". Thus
hath it been decreed in the Book, if ye be of them that comprehend.
14 When travelling, if ye should stop and rest in some safe spot, perform
ye—men and women alike—a single prostration in place of each unsaid
Obligatory Prayer, and while prostrating say "Glorified be God, the Lord
of Might and Majesty, of Grace and Bounty". Whoso is unable to do this,
let him say only "Glorified be God"; this shall assuredly suffice him. He
is, of a truth, the all-sufficing, the ever-abiding, the forgiving,
compassionate God. Upon completing your prostrations, seat yourselves
cross-legged—men and women alike—and eighteen times repeat "Glorified be
God, the Lord of the kingdoms of earth and heaven". Thus doth the Lord
make plain the ways of truth and guidance, ways that lead to one way,
which is this Straight Path. Render thanks unto God for this most gracious
favour; offer praise unto Him for this bounty that hath encompassed the
heavens and the earth; extol Him for this mercy that hath pervaded all
creation.
15 Say: God hath made My hidden love the key to the Treasure; would that
ye might perceive it! But for the key, the Treasure would to all eternity
have remained concealed; would that ye might believe it! Say: This is the
Source of Revelation, the Dawning-place of Splendour, Whose brightness
hath illumined the horizons of the world. Would that ye might understand!
This is, verily, that fixed Decree through which every irrevocable decree
hath been established.
16 O Pen of the Most High! Say: O people of the world! We have enjoined
upon you fasting during a brief period, and at its close have designated
for you Naw-Rúz as a feast. Thus hath the Day-Star of Utterance shone
forth above the horizon of the Book as decreed by Him Who is the Lord of
the beginning and the end. Let the days in excess of the months be placed
before the month of fasting. We have ordained that these, amid all nights
and days, shall be the manifestations of the letter Há, and thus they have
not been bounded by the limits of the year and its months. It behoveth the
people of Bahá, throughout these days, to provide good cheer for
themselves, their kindred and, beyond them, the poor and needy, and with
joy and exultation to hail and glorify their Lord, to sing His praise and
magnify His Name; and when they end—these days of giving that precede the
season of restraint—let them enter upon the Fast. Thus hath it been
ordained by Him Who is the Lord of all mankind. The traveller, the ailing,
those who are with child or giving suck, are not bound by the Fast; they
have been exempted by God as a token of His grace. He, verily, is the
Almighty, the Most Generous.
17 These are the ordinances of God that have been set down in the Books
and Tablets by His Most Exalted Pen. Hold ye fast unto His statutes and
commandments, and be not of those who, following their idle fancies and
vain imaginings, have clung to the standards fixed by their own selves,
and cast behind their backs the standards laid down by God. Abstain from
food and drink from sunrise to sundown, and beware lest desire deprive you
of this grace that is appointed in the Book.
18 It hath been ordained that every believer in God, the Lord of
Judgement, shall, each day, having washed his hands and then his face,
seat himself and, turning unto God, repeat "Alláh-u-Abhá" ninety-five
times. Such was the decree of the Maker of the Heavens when, with majesty
and power, He established Himself upon the thrones of His Names. Perform
ye, likewise, ablutions for the Obligatory Prayer; this is the command of
God, the Incomparable, the Unrestrained.
19 Ye have been forbidden to commit murder or adultery, or to engage in
backbiting or calumny; shun ye, then, what hath been prohibited in the
holy Books and Tablets.
20 We have divided inheritance into seven categories: to the children, We
have allotted nine parts comprising five hundred and forty shares; to the
wife, eight parts comprising four hundred and eighty shares; to the
father, seven parts comprising four hundred and twenty shares; to the
mother, six parts comprising three hundred and sixty shares; to the
brothers, five parts or three hundred shares; to the sisters, four parts
or two hundred and forty shares; and to the teachers, three parts or one
hundred and eighty shares. Such was the ordinance of My Forerunner, He Who
extolleth My Name in the night season and at the break of day. When We
heard the clamour of the children as yet unborn, We doubled their share
and decreased those of the rest. He, of a truth, hath power to ordain
whatsoever He desireth, and He doeth as He pleaseth by virtue of His
sovereign might.
21 Should the deceased leave no offspring, their share shall revert to the
House of Justice, to be expended by the Trustees of the All-Merciful on
the orphaned and widowed, and on whatsoever will bring benefit to the
generality of the people, that all may give thanks unto their Lord, the
All-Gracious, the Pardoner.
22 Should the deceased leave offspring, but none of the other categories
of heirs that have been specified in the Book, they shall receive two
thirds of the inheritance and the remaining third shall revert to the
House of Justice. Such is the command which hath been given, in majesty
and glory, by Him Who is the All-Possessing, the Most High.
23 If the deceased should leave none of the specified heirs, but have
among his relatives nephews and nieces, whether on his brother’s or his
sister’s side, two thirds of the inheritance shall pass to them; or,
lacking these, to his uncles and aunts on both his father’s and his
mother’s side, and after them to their sons and daughters. The remaining
third of the inheritance shall, in any case, revert to the Seat of
Justice. Thus hath it been laid down in the Book by Him Who ruleth over
all men.
24 Should the deceased be survived by none of those whose names have been
recorded by the Pen of the Most High, his estate shall, in its entirety,
revert to the aforementioned Seat that it may be expended on that which is
prescribed by God. He, verily, is the Ordainer, the Omnipotent.
25 We have assigned the residence and personal clothing of the deceased to
the male, not female, offspring, nor to the other heirs. He, verily, is
the Munificent, the All-Bountiful.
26 Should the son of the deceased have passed away in the days of his
father and have left children, they will inherit their father’s share, as
prescribed in the Book of God. Divide ye their share amongst them with
perfect justice. Thus have the billows of the Ocean of Utterance surged,
casting forth the pearls of the laws decreed by the Lord of all mankind.
27 If the deceased should leave children who are under age, their share of
the inheritance must be entrusted to a reliable individual, or to a
company, that it may be invested on their behalf in trade and business
until they come of age. The trustee should be assigned a due share of the
profit that hath accrued to it from being thus employed.
28 Division of the estate should take place only after the Ḥuqúqu’lláh
hath been paid, any debts have been settled, the expenses of the funeral
and burial defrayed, and such provision made that the deceased may be
carried to his resting-place with dignity and honour. Thus hath it been
ordained by Him Who is Lord of the beginning and the end.
29 Say: This is that hidden knowledge which shall never change, since its
beginning is with nine, the symbol that betokeneth the concealed and
manifest, the inviolable and unapproachably exalted Name. As for what We
have appropriated to the children, this is a bounty conferred on them by
God, that they may render thanks unto their Lord, the Compassionate, the
Merciful. These, verily, are the Laws of God; transgress them not at the
prompting of your base and selfish desires. Observe ye the injunctions
laid upon you by Him Who is the Dawning-place of Utterance. The sincere
among His servants will regard the precepts set forth by God as the Water
of Life to the followers of every faith, and the Lamp of wisdom and loving
providence to all the denizens of earth and heaven.
30 The Lord hath ordained that in every city a House of Justice be
established wherein shall gather counsellors to the number of Bahá, and
should it exceed this number it doth not matter. They should consider
themselves as entering the Court of the presence of God, the Exalted, the
Most High, and as beholding Him Who is the Unseen. It behoveth them to be
the trusted ones of the Merciful among men and to regard themselves as the
guardians appointed of God for all that dwell on earth. It is incumbent
upon them to take counsel together and to have regard for the interests of
the servants of God, for His sake, even as they regard their own
interests, and to choose that which is meet and seemly. Thus hath the Lord
your God commanded you. Beware lest ye put away that which is clearly
revealed in His Tablet. Fear God, O ye that perceive.
31 O people of the world! Build ye houses of worship throughout the lands
in the name of Him Who is the Lord of all religions. Make them as perfect
as is possible in the world of being, and adorn them with that which
befitteth them, not with images and effigies. Then, with radiance and joy,
celebrate therein the praise of your Lord, the Most Compassionate. Verily,
by His remembrance the eye is cheered and the heart is filled with light.
32 The Lord hath ordained that those of you who are able shall make
pilgrimage to the sacred House, and from this He hath exempted women as a
mercy on His part. He, of a truth, is the All-Bountiful, the Most
Generous.
33 O people of Bahá! It is incumbent upon each one of you to engage in
some occupation—such as a craft, a trade or the like. We have exalted your
engagement in such work to the rank of worship of the one true God.
Reflect, O people, on the grace and blessings of your Lord, and yield Him
thanks at eventide and dawn. Waste not your hours in idleness and sloth,
but occupy yourselves with what will profit you and others. Thus hath it
been decreed in this Tablet from whose horizon hath shone the day-star of
wisdom and utterance. The most despised of men in the sight of God are
they who sit and beg. Hold ye fast unto the cord of means and place your
trust in God, the Provider of all means.
34 The kissing of hands hath been forbidden in the Book. This practice is
prohibited by God, the Lord of glory and command. To none is it permitted
to seek absolution from another soul; let repentance be between yourselves
and God. He, verily, is the Pardoner, the Bounteous, the Gracious, the One
Who absolveth the repentant.
35 O ye servants of the Merciful One! Arise to serve the Cause of God, in
such wise that the cares and sorrows caused by them that have disbelieved
in the Dayspring of the Signs of God may not afflict you. At the time when
the Promise was fulfilled and the Promised One made manifest, differences
have appeared amongst the kindreds of the earth and each people hath
followed its own fancy and idle imaginings.
36 Amongst the people is he who seateth himself amid the sandals by the
door whilst coveting in his heart the seat of honour. Say: What manner of
man art thou, O vain and heedless one, who wouldst appear as other than
thou art? And among the people is he who layeth claim to inner knowledge,
and still deeper knowledge concealed within this knowledge. Say: Thou
speakest false! By God! What thou dost possess is naught but husks which
We have left to thee as bones are left to dogs. By the righteousness of
the one true God! Were anyone to wash the feet of all mankind, and were he
to worship God in the forests, valleys, and mountains, upon high hills and
lofty peaks, to leave no rock or tree, no clod of earth, but was a witness
to his worship—yet, should the fragrance of My good pleasure not be
inhaled from him, his works would never be acceptable unto God. Thus hath
it been decreed by Him Who is the Lord of all. How many a man hath
secluded himself in the climes of India, denied himself the things that
God hath decreed as lawful, imposed upon himself austerities and
mortifications, and hath not been remembered by God, the Revealer of
Verses. Make not your deeds as snares wherewith to entrap the object of
your aspiration, and deprive not yourselves of this Ultimate Objective for
which have ever yearned all such as have drawn nigh unto God. Say: The
very life of all deeds is My good pleasure, and all things depend upon
Mine acceptance. Read ye the Tablets that ye may know what hath been
purposed in the Books of God, the All-Glorious, the Ever-Bounteous. He who
attaineth to My love hath title to a throne of gold, to sit thereon in
honour over all the world; he who is deprived thereof, though he sit upon
the dust, that dust would seek refuge with God, the Lord of all Religions.
37 Whoso layeth claim to a Revelation direct from God, ere the expiration
of a full thousand years, such a man is assuredly a lying impostor. We
pray God that He may graciously assist him to retract and repudiate such
claim. Should he repent, God will, no doubt, forgive him. If, however, he
persisteth in his error, God will, assuredly, send down one who will deal
mercilessly with him. Terrible, indeed, is God in punishing! Whosoever
interpreteth this verse otherwise than its obvious meaning is deprived of
the Spirit of God and of His mercy which encompasseth all created things.
Fear God, and follow not your idle fancies. Nay, rather, follow the
bidding of your Lord, the Almighty, the All-Wise. Erelong shall clamorous
voices be raised in most lands. Shun them, O My people, and follow not the
iniquitous and evil-hearted. This is that of which We gave you forewarning
when We were dwelling in ‘Iráq, then later while in the Land of Mystery,
and now from this Resplendent Spot.
38 Be not dismayed, O peoples of the world, when the day-star of My beauty
is set, and the heaven of My tabernacle is concealed from your eyes. Arise
to further My Cause, and to exalt My Word amongst men. We are with you at
all times, and shall strengthen you through the power of truth. We are
truly almighty. Whoso hath recognized Me will arise and serve Me with such
determination that the powers of earth and heaven shall be unable to
defeat his purpose.
39 The peoples of the world are fast asleep. Were they to wake from their
slumber, they would hasten with eagerness unto God, the All-Knowing, the
All-Wise. They would cast away everything they possess, be it all the
treasures of the earth, that their Lord may remember them to the extent of
addressing to them but one word. Such is the instruction given you by Him
Who holdeth the knowledge of things hidden, in a Tablet which the eye of
creation hath not seen, and which is revealed to none except His own Self,
the omnipotent Protector of all worlds. So bewildered are they in the
drunkenness of their evil desires, that they are powerless to recognize
the Lord of all being, Whose voice calleth aloud from every direction:
"There is none other God but Me, the Mighty, the All-Wise."
40 Say: Rejoice not in the things ye possess; tonight they are yours,
tomorrow others will possess them. Thus warneth you He Who is the
All-Knowing, the All-Informed. Say: Can ye claim that what ye own is
lasting or secure? Nay! By Myself, the All-Merciful, ye cannot, if ye be
of them who judge fairly. The days of your life flee away as a breath of
wind, and all your pomp and glory shall be folded up as were the pomp and
glory of those gone before you. Reflect, O people! What hath become of
your bygone days, your lost centuries? Happy the days that have been
consecrated to the remembrance of God, and blessed the hours which have
been spent in praise of Him Who is the All-Wise. By My life! Neither the
pomp of the mighty, nor the wealth of the rich, nor even the ascendancy of
the ungodly will endure. All will perish, at a word from Him. He, verily,
is the All-Powerful, the All-Compelling, the Almighty. What advantage is
there in the earthly things which men possess? That which shall profit
them, they have utterly neglected. Erelong, they will awake from their
slumber, and find themselves unable to obtain that which hath escaped them
in the days of their Lord, the Almighty, the All-Praised. Did they but
know it, they would renounce their all, that their names may be mentioned
before His throne. They, verily, are accounted among the dead.
41 Amongst the people is he whose learning hath made him proud, and who
hath been debarred thereby from recognizing My Name, the Self-Subsisting;
who, when he heareth the tread of sandals following behind him, waxeth
greater in his own esteem than Nimrod. Say: O rejected one! Where now is
his abode? By God, it is the nethermost fire. Say: O concourse of divines!
Hear ye not the shrill voice of My Most Exalted Pen? See ye not this Sun
that shineth in refulgent splendour above the All-Glorious Horizon? For
how long will ye worship the idols of your evil passions? Forsake your
vain imaginings, and turn yourselves unto God, your Everlasting Lord.
42 Endowments dedicated to charity revert to God, the Revealer of Signs.
None hath the right to dispose of them without leave from Him Who is the
Dawning-place of Revelation. After Him, this authority shall pass to the
Ag̱ẖsán, and after them to the House of Justice—should it be established
in the world by then—that they may use these endowments for the benefit of
the Places which have been exalted in this Cause, and for whatsoever hath
been enjoined upon them by Him Who is the God of might and power.
Otherwise, the endowments shall revert to the people of Bahá who speak not
except by His leave and judge not save in accordance with what God hath
decreed in this Tablet—lo, they are the champions of victory betwixt
heaven and earth—that they may use them in the manner that hath been laid
down in the Book by God, the Mighty, the Bountiful.
43 Lament not in your hours of trial, neither rejoice therein; seek ye the
Middle Way which is the remembrance of Me in your afflictions and
reflection over that which may befall you in future. Thus informeth you He
Who is the Omniscient, He Who is aware.
44 Shave not your heads; God hath adorned them with hair, and in this
there are signs from the Lord of creation to those who reflect upon the
requirements of nature. He, verily, is the God of strength and wisdom.
Notwithstanding, it is not seemly to let the hair pass beyond the limit of
the ears. Thus hath it been decreed by Him Who is the Lord of all worlds.
45 Exile and imprisonment are decreed for the thief, and, on the third
offence, place ye a mark upon his brow so that, thus identified, he may
not be accepted in the cities of God and His countries. Beware lest,
through compassion, ye neglect to carry out the statutes of the religion
of God; do that which hath been bidden you by Him Who is compassionate and
merciful. We school you with the rod of wisdom and laws, like unto the
father who educateth his son, and this for naught but the protection of
your own selves and the elevation of your stations. By My life, were ye to
discover what We have desired for you in revealing Our holy laws, ye would
offer up your very souls for this sacred, this mighty, and most exalted
Faith.
46 Whoso wisheth to make use of vessels of silver and gold is at liberty
to do so. Take heed lest, when partaking of food, ye plunge your hands
into the contents of bowls and platters. Adopt ye such usages as are most
in keeping with refinement. He, verily, desireth to see in you the manners
of the inmates of Paradise in His mighty and most sublime Kingdom. Hold ye
fast unto refinement under all conditions, that your eyes may be preserved
from beholding what is repugnant both to your own selves and to the
dwellers of Paradise. Should anyone depart therefrom, his deed shall at
that moment be rendered vain; yet should he have good reason, God will
excuse him. He, in truth, is the Gracious, the Most Bountiful.
47 He Who is the Dawning-place of God’s Cause hath no partner in the Most
Great Infallibility. He it is Who, in the kingdom of creation, is the
Manifestation of "He doeth whatsoever He willeth". God hath reserved this
distinction unto His own Self, and ordained for none a share in so sublime
and transcendent a station. This is the Decree of God, concealed ere now
within the veil of impenetrable mystery. We have disclosed it in this
Revelation, and have thereby rent asunder the veils of such as have failed
to recognize that which the Book of God set forth and who were numbered
with the heedless.
48 Unto every father hath been enjoined the instruction of his son and
daughter in the art of reading and writing and in all that hath been laid
down in the Holy Tablet. He that putteth away that which is commanded unto
him, the Trustees are then to take from him that which is required for
their instruction if he be wealthy and, if not, the matter devolveth upon
the House of Justice. Verily have We made it a shelter for the poor and
needy. He that bringeth up his son or the son of another, it is as though
he hath brought up a son of Mine; upon him rest My glory, My
loving-kindness, My mercy, that have compassed the world.
49 God hath imposed a fine on every adulterer and adulteress, to be paid
to the House of Justice: nine miṯẖqáls of gold, to be doubled if they
should repeat the offence. Such is the penalty which He Who is the Lord of
Names hath assigned them in this world; and in the world to come He hath
ordained for them a humiliating torment. Should anyone be afflicted by a
sin, it behoveth him to repent thereof and return unto his Lord. He,
verily, granteth forgiveness unto whomsoever He willeth, and none may
question that which it pleaseth Him to ordain. He is, in truth, the
Ever-Forgiving, the Almighty, the All-Praised.
50 Beware lest ye be hindered by the veils of glory from partaking of the
crystal waters of this living Fountain. Seize ye the chalice of salvation
at this dawntide in the name of Him Who causeth the day to break, and
drink your fill in praise of Him Who is the All-Glorious, the
Incomparable.
51 We have made it lawful for you to listen to music and singing. Take
heed, however, lest listening thereto should cause you to overstep the
bounds of propriety and dignity. Let your joy be the joy born of My Most
Great Name, a Name that bringeth rapture to the heart, and filleth with
ecstasy the minds of all who have drawn nigh unto God. We, verily, have
made music as a ladder for your souls, a means whereby they may be lifted
up unto the realm on high; make it not, therefore, as wings to self and
passion. Truly, We are loath to see you numbered with the foolish.
52 We have decreed that a third part of all fines shall go to the Seat of
Justice, and We admonish its men to observe pure justice, that they may
expend what is thus accumulated for such purposes as have been enjoined
upon them by Him Who is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise. O ye Men of
Justice! Be ye, in the realm of God, shepherds unto His sheep and guard
them from the ravening wolves that have appeared in disguise, even as ye
would guard your own sons. Thus exhorteth you the Counsellor, the
Faithful.
53 Should differences arise amongst you over any matter, refer it to God
while the Sun still shineth above the horizon of this Heaven and, when it
hath set, refer ye to whatsoever hath been sent down by Him. This, verily,
is sufficient unto the peoples of the world. Say: Let not your hearts be
perturbed, O people, when the glory of My Presence is withdrawn, and the
ocean of My utterance is stilled. In My presence amongst you there is a
wisdom, and in My absence there is yet another, inscrutable to all but
God, the Incomparable, the All-Knowing. Verily, We behold you from Our
realm of glory, and shall aid whosoever will arise for the triumph of Our
Cause with the hosts of the Concourse on high and a company of Our
favoured angels.
54 O peoples of the earth! God, the Eternal Truth, is My witness that
streams of fresh and soft-flowing waters have gushed from the rocks
through the sweetness of the words uttered by your Lord, the
Unconstrained; and still ye slumber. Cast away that which ye possess, and,
on the wings of detachment, soar beyond all created things. Thus biddeth
you the Lord of creation, the movement of Whose Pen hath revolutionized
the soul of mankind.
55 Know ye from what heights your Lord, the All-Glorious, is calling?
Think ye that ye have recognized the Pen wherewith your Lord, the Lord of
all names, commandeth you? Nay, by My life! Did ye but know it, ye would
renounce the world, and would hasten with your whole hearts to the
presence of the Well-Beloved. Your spirits would be so transported by His
Word as to throw into commotion the Greater World—how much more this small
and petty one! Thus have the showers of My bounty been poured down from
the heaven of My loving-kindness, as a token of My grace, that ye may be
of the thankful.
56 The penalties for wounding or striking a person depend upon the
severity of the injury; for each degree the Lord of Judgement hath
prescribed a certain indemnity. He is, in truth, the Ordainer, the Mighty,
the Most Exalted. We shall, if it be Our Will, set forth these payments in
their just degrees—this is a promise on Our part, and He, verily, is the
Keeper of His pledge, the Knower of all things.
57 Verily, it is enjoined upon you to offer a feast, once in every month,
though only water be served; for God hath purposed to bind hearts
together, albeit through both earthly and heavenly means.
58 Beware lest the desires of the flesh and of a corrupt inclination
provoke divisions among you. Be ye as the fingers of one hand, the members
of one body. Thus counselleth you the Pen of Revelation, if ye be of them
that believe.
59 Consider the mercy of God and His gifts. He enjoineth upon you that
which shall profit you, though He Himself can well dispense with all
creatures. Your evil doings can never harm Us, neither can your good works
profit Us. We summon you wholly for the sake of God. To this every man of
understanding and insight will testify.
60 If ye should hunt with beasts or birds of prey, invoke ye the Name of
God when ye send them to pursue their quarry; for then whatever they catch
shall be lawful unto you, even should ye find it to have died. He, verily,
is the Omniscient, the All-Informed. Take heed, however, that ye hunt not
to excess. Tread ye the path of justice and equity in all things. Thus
biddeth you He Who is the Dawning-place of Revelation, would that ye might
comprehend.
61 God hath bidden you to show forth kindliness towards My kindred, but He
hath granted them no right to the property of others. He, verily, is
self-sufficient, above any need of His creatures.
62 Should anyone intentionally destroy a house by fire, him also shall ye
burn; should anyone deliberately take another’s life, him also shall ye
put to death. Take ye hold of the precepts of God with all your strength
and power, and abandon the ways of the ignorant. Should ye condemn the
arsonist and the murderer to life imprisonment, it would be permissible
according to the provisions of the Book. He, verily, hath power to ordain
whatsoever He pleaseth.
63 God hath prescribed matrimony unto you. Beware that ye take not unto
yourselves more wives than two. Whoso contenteth himself with a single
partner from among the maidservants of God, both he and she shall live in
tranquillity. And he who would take into his service a maid may do so with
propriety. Such is the ordinance which, in truth and justice, hath been
recorded by the Pen of Revelation. Enter into wedlock, O people, that ye
may bring forth one who will make mention of Me amid My servants. This is
My bidding unto you; hold fast to it as an assistance to yourselves.
64 O people of the world! Follow not the promptings of the self, for it
summoneth insistently to wickedness and lust; follow, rather, Him Who is
the Possessor of all created things, Who biddeth you to show forth piety,
and manifest the fear of God. He, verily, is independent of all His
creatures. Take heed not to stir up mischief in the land after it hath
been set in order. Whoso acteth in this way is not of Us, and We are quit
of him. Such is the command which hath, through the power of truth, been
made manifest from the heaven of Revelation.
65 It hath been laid down in the Bayán that marriage is dependent upon the
consent of both parties. Desiring to establish love, unity and harmony
amidst Our servants, We have conditioned it, once the couple’s wish is
known, upon the permission of their parents, lest enmity and rancour
should arise amongst them. And in this We have yet other purposes. Thus
hath Our commandment been ordained.
66 No marriage may be contracted without payment of a dowry, which hath
been fixed for city-dwellers at nineteen miṯẖqáls of pure gold, and for
village-dwellers at the same amount in silver. Whoso wisheth to increase
this sum, it is forbidden him to exceed the limit of ninety-five
miṯẖqáls. Thus hath the command been writ in majesty and power. If he
content himself, however, with a payment of the lowest level, it shall be
better for him according to the Book. God, verily, enricheth whomsoever He
willeth through both heavenly and earthly means, and He, in truth, hath
power over all things.
67 It hath been decreed by God that, should any one of His servants intend
to travel, he must fix for his wife a time when he will return home. If he
return by the promised time, he will have obeyed the bidding of his Lord
and shall be numbered by the Pen of His behest among the righteous;
otherwise, if there be good reason for delay, he must inform his wife and
make the utmost endeavour to return to her. Should neither of these
eventualities occur, it behoveth her to wait for a period of nine months,
after which there is no impediment to her taking another husband; but
should she wait longer, God, verily, loveth those women and men who show
forth patience. Obey ye My commandments, and follow not the ungodly, they
who have been reckoned as sinners in God’s Holy Tablet. If, during the
period of her waiting, word should reach her from her husband, she should
choose the course that is praiseworthy. He, of a truth, desireth that His
servants and His handmaids should be at peace with one another; take heed
lest ye do aught that may provoke intransigence amongst you. Thus hath the
decree been fixed and the promise come to pass. If, however, news should
reach her of her husband’s death or murder, and be confirmed by general
report, or by the testimony of two just witnesses, it behoveth her to
remain single; then, upon completion of the fixed number of months, she is
free to adopt the course of her choosing. Such is the bidding of Him Who
is mighty and powerful in His command.
68 Should resentment or antipathy arise between husband and wife, he is
not to divorce her but to bide in patience throughout the course of one
whole year, that perchance the fragrance of affection may be renewed
between them. If, upon the completion of this period, their love hath not
returned, it is permissible for divorce to take place. God’s wisdom,
verily, hath encompassed all things. The Lord hath prohibited, in a Tablet
inscribed by the Pen of His command, the practice to which ye formerly had
recourse when thrice ye had divorced a woman. This He hath done as a
favour on His part, that ye may be accounted among the thankful. He who
hath divorced his wife may choose, upon the passing of each month, to
remarry her when there is mutual affection and consent, so long as she
hath not taken another husband. Should she have wed again, then, by this
other union, the separation is confirmed and the matter is concluded
unless, clearly, her circumstances change. Thus hath the decree been
inscribed with majesty in this glorious Tablet by Him Who is the
Dawning-place of Beauty.
69 If the wife accompany her husband on a journey, and differences arise
between them on the way, he is required to provide her with her expenses
for one whole year, and either to return her whence she came or to entrust
her, together with the necessaries for her journey, to a dependable person
who is to escort her home. Thy Lord, verily, ordaineth as He pleaseth, by
virtue of a sovereignty that overshadoweth the peoples of the earth.
70 Should a woman be divorced in consequence of a proven act of
infidelity, she shall receive no maintenance during her period of waiting.
Thus hath the day-star of Our commandment shone forth resplendent from the
firmament of justice. Truly, the Lord loveth union and harmony and
abhorreth separation and divorce. Live ye one with another, O people, in
radiance and joy. By My life! All that are on earth shall pass away, while
good deeds alone shall endure; to the truth of My words God doth Himself
bear witness. Compose your differences, O My servants; then heed ye the
admonition of Our Pen of Glory and follow not the arrogant and wayward.
71 Take heed lest the world beguile you as it beguiled the people who went
before you! Observe ye the statutes and precepts of your Lord, and walk ye
in this Way which hath been laid out before you in righteousness and
truth. They who eschew iniquity and error, who adhere to virtue, are, in
the sight of the one true God, among the choicest of His creatures; their
names are extolled by the Concourse of the realms above, and by those who
dwell in this Tabernacle which hath been raised in the name of God.
72 It is forbidden you to trade in slaves, be they men or women. It is not
for him who is himself a servant to buy another of God’s servants, and
this hath been prohibited in His Holy Tablet. Thus, by His mercy, hath the
commandment been recorded by the Pen of justice. Let no man exalt himself
above another; all are but bondslaves before the Lord, and all exemplify
the truth that there is none other God but Him. He, verily, is the
All-Wise, Whose wisdom encompasseth all things.
73 Adorn yourselves with the raiment of goodly deeds. He whose deeds
attain unto God’s good pleasure is assuredly of the people of Bahá and is
remembered before His throne. Assist ye the Lord of all creation with
works of righteousness, and also through wisdom and utterance. Thus,
indeed, have ye been commanded in most of the Tablets by Him Who is the
All-Merciful. He, truly, is cognizant of what I say. Let none contend with
another, and let no soul slay another; this, verily, is that which was
forbidden you in a Book that hath lain concealed within the Tabernacle of
glory. What! Would ye kill him whom God hath quickened, whom He hath
endowed with spirit through a breath from Him? Grievous then would be your
trespass before His throne! Fear God, and lift not the hand of injustice
and oppression to destroy what He hath Himself raised up; nay, walk ye in
the way of God, the True One. No sooner did the hosts of true knowledge
appear, bearing the standards of Divine utterance, than the tribes of the
religions were put to flight, save only those who willed to drink from the
stream of everlasting life in a Paradise created by the breath of the
All-Glorious.
74 God hath decreed, in token of His mercy unto His creatures, that semen
is not unclean. Yield thanks unto Him with joy and radiance, and follow
not such as are remote from the Dawning-place of His nearness. Arise ye,
under all conditions, to render service to the Cause, for God will
assuredly assist you through the power of His sovereignty which
overshadoweth the worlds. Cleave ye unto the cord of refinement with such
tenacity as to allow no trace of dirt to be seen upon your garments. Such
is the injunction of One Who is sanctified above all refinement. Whoso
falleth short of this standard with good reason shall incur no blame. God,
verily, is the Forgiving, the Merciful. Wash ye every soiled thing with
water that hath undergone no alteration in any one of the three respects;
take heed not to use water that hath been altered through exposure to the
air or to some other agent. Be ye the very essence of cleanliness amongst
mankind. This, truly, is what your Lord, the Incomparable, the All-Wise,
desireth for you.
75 God hath, likewise, as a bounty from His presence, abolished the
concept of "uncleanness", whereby divers things and peoples have been held
to be impure. He, of a certainty, is the Ever-Forgiving, the Most
Generous. Verily, all created things were immersed in the sea of
purification when, on that first day of Ridván, We shed upon the whole of
creation the splendours of Our most excellent Names and Our most exalted
Attributes. This, verily, is a token of My loving providence, which hath
encompassed all the worlds. Consort ye then with the followers of all
religions, and proclaim ye the Cause of your Lord, the Most Compassionate;
this is the very crown of deeds, if ye be of them who understand.
76 God hath enjoined upon you to observe the utmost cleanliness, to the
extent of washing what is soiled with dust, let alone with hardened dirt
and similar defilement. Fear Him, and be of those who are pure. Should the
garb of anyone be visibly sullied, his prayers shall not ascend to God,
and the celestial Concourse will turn away from him. Make use of
rose-water, and of pure perfume; this, indeed, is that which God hath
loved from the beginning that hath no beginning, in order that there may
be diffused from you what your Lord, the Incomparable, the All-Wise,
desireth.
77 God hath relieved you of the ordinance laid down in the Bayán
concerning the destruction of books. We have permitted you to read such
sciences as are profitable unto you, not such as end in idle disputation;
better is this for you, if ye be of them that comprehend.
78 O kings of the earth! He Who is the sovereign Lord of all is come. The
Kingdom is God’s, the omnipotent Protector, the Self-Subsisting. Worship
none but God, and, with radiant hearts, lift up your faces unto your Lord,
the Lord of all names. This is a Revelation to which whatever ye possess
can never be compared, could ye but know it.
79 We see you rejoicing in that which ye have amassed for others and
shutting out yourselves from the worlds which naught except My guarded
Tablet can reckon. The treasures ye have laid up have drawn you far away
from your ultimate objective. This ill beseemeth you, could ye but
understand it. Wash from your hearts all earthly defilements, and hasten
to enter the Kingdom of your Lord, the Creator of earth and heaven, Who
caused the world to tremble and all its peoples to wail, except them that
have renounced all things and clung to that which the Hidden Tablet hath
ordained.
80 This is the Day in which He Who held converse with God hath attained
the light of the Ancient of Days, and quaffed the pure waters of reunion
from this Cup that hath caused the seas to swell. Say: By the one true
God! Sinai is circling round the Dayspring of Revelation, while from the
heights of the Kingdom the Voice of the Spirit of God is heard
proclaiming: "Bestir yourselves, ye proud ones of the earth, and hasten ye
unto Him." Carmel hath, in this Day, hastened in longing adoration to
attain His court, whilst from the heart of Zion there cometh the cry: "The
promise is fulfilled. That which had been announced in the holy Writ of
God, the Most Exalted, the Almighty, the Best-Beloved, is made manifest."
81 O kings of the earth! The Most Great Law hath been revealed in this
Spot, this scene of transcendent splendour. Every hidden thing hath been
brought to light by virtue of the Will of the Supreme Ordainer, He Who
hath ushered in the Last Hour, through Whom the Moon hath been cleft, and
every irrevocable decree expounded.
82 Ye are but vassals, O kings of the earth! He Who is the King of Kings
hath appeared, arrayed in His most wondrous glory, and is summoning you
unto Himself, the Help in Peril, the Self-Subsisting. Take heed lest pride
deter you from recognizing the Source of Revelation, lest the things of
this world shut you out as by a veil from Him Who is the Creator of
heaven. Arise, and serve Him Who is the Desire of all nations, Who hath
created you through a word from Him, and ordained you to be, for all time,
the emblems of His sovereignty.
83 By the righteousness of God! It is not Our wish to lay hands on your
kingdoms. Our mission is to seize and possess the hearts of men. Upon them
the eyes of Bahá are fastened. To this testifieth the Kingdom of Names,
could ye but comprehend it. Whoso followeth his Lord will renounce the
world and all that is therein; how much greater, then, must be the
detachment of Him Who holdeth so august a station! Forsake your palaces,
and haste ye to gain admittance into His Kingdom. This, indeed, will
profit you both in this world and in the next. To this testifieth the Lord
of the realm on high, did ye but know it.
84 How great the blessedness that awaiteth the king who will arise to aid
My Cause in My kingdom, who will detach himself from all else but Me! Such
a king is numbered with the companions of the Crimson Ark—the Ark which
God hath prepared for the people of Bahá. All must glorify his name, must
reverence his station, and aid him to unlock the cities with the keys of
My Name, the omnipotent Protector of all that inhabit the visible and
invisible kingdoms. Such a king is the very eye of mankind, the luminous
ornament on the brow of creation, the fountainhead of blessings unto the
whole world. Offer up, O people of Bahá, your substance, nay your very
lives, for his assistance.
85 O Emperor of Austria! He Who is the Dayspring of God’s Light dwelt in
the prison of Akká at the time when thou didst set forth to visit the Aqsá
Mosque. Thou passed Him by, and inquired not about Him by Whom every house
is exalted and every lofty gate unlocked. We, verily, made it a place
whereunto the world should turn, that they might remember Me, and yet thou
hast rejected Him Who is the Object of this remembrance, when He appeared
with the Kingdom of God, thy Lord and the Lord of the worlds. We have been
with thee at all times, and found thee clinging unto the Branch and
heedless of the Root. Thy Lord, verily, is a witness unto what I say. We
grieved to see thee circle round Our Name, whilst unaware of Us, though We
were before thy face. Open thine eyes, that thou mayest behold this
glorious Vision, and recognize Him Whom thou invokest in the daytime and
in the night season, and gaze on the Light that shineth above this
luminous Horizon.
86 Say: O King of Berlin! Give ear unto the Voice calling from this
manifest Temple: "Verily, there is none other God but Me, the Everlasting,
the Peerless, the Ancient of Days." Take heed lest pride debar thee from
recognizing the Dayspring of Divine Revelation, lest earthly desires shut
thee out, as by a veil, from the Lord of the Throne above and of the earth
below. Thus counselleth thee the Pen of the Most High. He, verily, is the
Most Gracious, the All-Bountiful. Do thou remember the one(1) whose power
transcended thy power, and whose station excelled thy station. Where is
he? Whither are gone the things he possessed? Take warning, and be not of
them that are fast asleep. He it was who cast the Tablet of God behind him
when We made known unto him what the hosts of tyranny had caused Us to
suffer. Wherefore, disgrace assailed him from all sides, and he went down
to dust in great loss. Think deeply, O King, concerning him, and
concerning them who, like unto thee, have conquered cities and ruled over
men. The All-Merciful brought them down from their palaces to their
graves. Be warned, be of them who reflect.
87 We have asked nothing from you. For the sake of God We, verily, exhort
you, and will be patient as We have been patient in that which hath
befallen Us at your hands, O concourse of kings!
88 Hearken ye, O Rulers of America and the Presidents of the Republics
therein, unto that which the Dove is warbling on the Branch of Eternity:
"There is none other God but Me, the Ever-Abiding, the Forgiving, the
All-Bountiful." Adorn ye the temple of dominion with the ornament of
justice and of the fear of God, and its head with the crown of the
remembrance of your Lord, the Creator of the heavens. Thus counselleth you
He Who is the Dayspring of Names, as bidden by Him Who is the All-Knowing,
the All-Wise. The Promised One hatthe Tablet ofh appeared in this
glorified Station, whereat all beings, both seen and unseen, have
rejoiced. Take ye advantage of the Day of God. Verily, to meet Him is
better for you than all that whereon the sun shineth, could ye but know
it. O concourse of rulers! Give ear unto that which hath been raised from
the Dayspring of Grandeur: "Verily, there is none other God but Me, the
Lord of Utterance, the All-Knowing." Bind ye the broken with the hands of
justice, and crush the oppressor who flourisheth with the rod of the
commandments of your Lord, the Ordainer, the All-Wise.
89 O people of Constantinople! Lo, from your midst We hear the baleful
hooting of the owl. Hath the drunkenness of passion laid hold upon you, or
is it that ye are sunk in heedlessness? O Spot that art situate on the
shores of the two seas! The throne of tyranny hath, verily, been
established upon thee, and the flame of hatred hath been kindled within
thy bosom, in such wise that the Concourse on high and they who circle
around the Exalted Throne have wailed and lamented. We behold in thee the
foolish ruling over the wise, and darkness vaunting itself against the
light. Thou art indeed filled with manifest pride. Hath thine outward
splendour made thee vainglorious? By Him Who is the Lord of mankind! It
shall soon perish, and thy daughters and thy widows and all the kindreds
that dwell within thee shall lament. Thus informeth thee the All-Knowing,
the All-Wise.
90 O banks of the Rhine! We have seen you covered with gore, inasmuch as
the swords of retribution were drawn against you; and you shall have
another turn. And We hear the lamentations of Berlin, though she be today
in conspicuous glory.
91 Let nothing grieve thee, O Land of Tá,(2) for God hath chosen thee to
be the source of the joy of all mankind. He shall, if it be His Will,
bless thy throne with one who will rule with justice, who will gather
together the flock of God which the wolves have scattered. Such a ruler
will, with joy and gladness, turn his face towards, and extend his favours
unto, the people of Bahá. He indeed is accounted in the sight of God as a
jewel among men. Upon him rest forever the glory of God and the glory of
all that dwell in the kingdom of His revelation.
92 Rejoice with great joy, for God hath made thee "the Dayspring of His
light", inasmuch as within thee was born the Manifestation of His Glory.
Be thou glad for this name that hath been conferred upon thee—a name
through which the Day-Star of grace hath shed its splendour, through which
both earth and heaven have been illumined.
93 Erelong will the state of affairs within thee be changed, and the reins
of power fall into the hands of the people. Verily, thy Lord is the
All-Knowing. His authority embraceth all things. Rest thou assured in the
gracious favour of thy Lord. The eye of His loving-kindness shall
everlastingly be directed towards thee. The day is approaching when thy
agitation will have been transmuted into peace and quiet calm. Thus hath
it been decreed in the wondrous Book.
94 O Land of Ḵẖá!(3) We hear from thee the voice of heroes, raised in
glorification of thy Lord, the All-Possessing, the Most Exalted. Blessed
the day on which the banners of the divine Names shall be upraised in the
kingdom of creation in My Name, the All-Glorious. On that day the faithful
shall rejoice in the victory of God, and the disbelievers shall lament.
95 None must contend with those who wield authority over the people; leave
unto them that which is theirs, and direct your attention to men’s hearts.
96 O Most Mighty Ocean! Sprinkle upon the nations that with which Thou
hast been charged by Him Who is the Sovereign of Eternity, and adorn the
temples of all the dwellers of the earth with the vesture of His laws
through which all hearts will rejoice and all eyes be brightened.
97 Should anyone acquire one hundred miṯẖqáls of gold, nineteen
miṯẖqáls thereof are God’s and to be rendered unto Him, the Fashioner of
earth and heaven. Take heed, O people, lest ye deprive yourselves of so
great a bounty. This We have commanded you, though We are well able to
dispense with you and with all who are in the heavens and on earth; in it
there are benefits and wisdoms beyond the ken of anyone but God, the
Omniscient, the All-Informed. Say: By this means He hath desired to purify
what ye possess and to enable you to draw nigh unto such stations as none
can comprehend save those whom God hath willed. He, in truth, is the
Beneficent, the Gracious, the Bountiful. O people! Deal not faithlessly
with the Right of God, nor, without His leave, make free with its
disposal. Thus hath His commandment been established in the holy Tablets,
and in this exalted Book. He who dealeth faithlessly with God shall in
justice meet with faithlessness himself; he, however, who acteth in
accordance with God’s bidding shall receive a blessing from the heaven of
the bounty of his Lord, the Gracious, the Bestower, the Generous, the
Ancient of Days. He, verily, hath willed for you that which is yet beyond
your knowledge, but which shall be known to you when, after this fleeting
life, your souls soar heavenwards and the trappings of your earthly joys
are folded up. Thus admonisheth you He in Whose possession is the Guarded
Tablet.
98 Various petitions have come before Our throne from the believers,
concerning laws from God, the Lord of the seen and the unseen, the Lord of
all worlds. We have, in consequence, revealed this Holy Tablet and arrayed
it with the mantle of His Law that haply the people may keep the
commandments of their Lord. Similar requests had been made of Us over
several previous years but We had, in Our wisdom, withheld Our Pen until,
in recent days, letters arrived from a number of the friends, and We have
therefore responded, through the power of truth, with that which shall
quicken the hearts of men.
99 Say: O leaders of religion! Weigh not the Book of God with such
standards and sciences as are current amongst you, for the Book itself is
the unerring Balance established amongst men. In this most perfect Balance
whatsoever the peoples and kindreds of the earth possess must be weighed,
while the measure of its weight should be tested according to its own
standard, did ye but know it.
100 The eye of My loving-kindness weepeth sore over you, inasmuch as ye
have failed to recognize the One upon Whom ye have been calling in the
daytime and in the night season, at even and at morn. Advance, O people,
with snow-white faces and radiant hearts, unto the blest and crimson Spot,
wherein the Sadratu’l-Muntahá is calling: "Verily, there is none other God
beside Me, the Omnipotent Protector, the Self-Subsisting!"
101 O ye leaders of religion! Who is the man amongst you that can rival Me
in vision or insight? Where is he to be found that dareth to claim to be
My equal in utterance or wisdom? No, by My Lord, the All-Merciful! All on
the earth shall pass away; and this is the face of your Lord, the
Almighty, the Well-Beloved.
102 We have decreed, O people, that the highest and last end of all
learning be the recognition of Him Who is the Object of all knowledge; and
yet, behold how ye have allowed your learning to shut you out, as by a
veil, from Him Who is the Dayspring of this Light, through Whom every
hidden thing hath been revealed. Could ye but discover the source whence
the splendour of this utterance is diffused, ye would cast away the
peoples of the world and all that they possess, and would draw nigh unto
this most blessed Seat of glory.
103 Say: This, verily, is the heaven in which the Mother Book is
treasured, could ye but comprehend it. He it is Who hath caused the Rock
to shout, and the Burning Bush to lift up its voice, upon the Mount rising
above the Holy Land, and proclaim: "The Kingdom is God’s, the sovereign
Lord of all, the All-Powerful, the Loving!"
104 We have not entered any school, nor read any of your dissertations.
Incline your ears to the words of this unlettered One, wherewith He
summoneth you unto God, the Ever-Abiding. Better is this for you than all
the treasures of the earth, could ye but comprehend it.
105 Whoso interpreteth what hath been sent down from the heaven of
Revelation, and altereth its evident meaning, he, verily, is of them that
have perverted the Sublime Word of God, and is of the lost ones in the
Lucid Book.
106 It hath been enjoined upon you to pare your nails, to bathe yourselves
each week in water that covereth your bodies, and to clean yourselves with
whatsoever ye have formerly employed. Take heed lest through negligence ye
fail to observe that which hath been prescribed unto you by Him Who is the
Incomparable, the Gracious. Immerse yourselves in clean water; it is not
permissible to bathe yourselves in water that hath already been used. See
that ye approach not the public pools of Persian baths; whoso maketh his
way toward such baths will smell their fetid odour ere he entereth
therein. Shun them, O people, and be not of those who ignominiously accept
such vileness. In truth, they are as sinks of foulness and contamination,
if ye be of them that apprehend. Avoid ye likewise the malodorous pools in
the courtyards of Persian homes, and be ye of the pure and sanctified.
Truly, We desire to behold you as manifestations of paradise on earth,
that there may be diffused from you such fragrance as shall rejoice the
hearts of the favoured of God. If the bather, instead of entering the
water, wash himself by pouring it upon his body, it shall be better for
him and shall absolve him of the need for bodily immersion. The Lord,
verily, hath willed, as a bounty from His presence, to make life easier
for you that ye may be of those who are truly thankful.
107 It is forbidden you to wed your fathers’ wives. We shrink, for very
shame, from treating of the subject of boys. Fear ye the Merciful, O
peoples of the world! Commit not that which is forbidden you in Our Holy
Tablet, and be not of those who rove distractedly in the wilderness of
their desires.
108 To none is it permitted to mutter sacred verses before the public gaze
as he walketh in the street or marketplace; nay rather, if he wish to
magnify the Lord, it behoveth him to do so in such places as have been
erected for this purpose, or in his own home. This is more in keeping with
sincerity and godliness. Thus hath the sun of Our commandment shone forth
above the horizon of Our utterance. Blessed, then, be those who do Our
bidding.
109 Unto everyone hath been enjoined the writing of a will. The testator
should head this document with the adornment of the Most Great Name, bear
witness therein unto the oneness of God in the Dayspring of His
Revelation, and make mention, as he may wish, of that which is
praiseworthy, so that it may be a testimony for him in the kingdoms of
Revelation and Creation and a treasure with his Lord, the Supreme
Protector, the Faithful.
110 All Feasts have attained their consummation in the two Most Great
Festivals, and in the two other Festivals that fall on the twin days—the
first of the Most Great Festivals being those days whereon the
All-Merciful shed upon the whole of creation the effulgent glory of His
most excellent Names and His most exalted Attributes, and the second being
that day on which We raised up the One Who announced unto mankind the glad
tidings of this Name, through which the dead have been resurrected and all
who are in the heavens and on earth have been gathered together. Thus hath
it been decreed by Him Who is the Ordainer, the Omniscient.
111 Happy the one who entereth upon the first day of the month of Bahá,
the day which God hath consecrated to this Great Name. And blessed be he
who evidenceth on this day the bounties that God hath bestowed upon him;
he, verily, is of those who show forth thanks to God through actions
betokening the Lord’s munificence which hath encompassed all the worlds.
Say: This day, verily, is the crown of all the months and the source
thereof, the day on which the breath of life is wafted over all created
things. Great is the blessedness of him who greeteth it with radiance and
joy. We testify that he is, in truth, among those who are blissful.
112 Say: The Most Great Festival is, indeed, the King of Festivals. Call
ye to mind, O people, the bounty which God hath conferred upon you. Ye
were sunk in slumber, and lo! He aroused you by the reviving breezes of
His Revelation, and made known unto you His manifest and undeviating Path.
113 Resort ye, in times of sickness, to competent physicians; We have not
set aside the use of material means, rather have We confirmed it through
this Pen, which God hath made to be the Dawning-place of His shining and
glorious Cause.
114 God had formerly laid upon each one of the believers the duty of
offering before Our throne priceless gifts from among his possessions.
Now, in token of Our gracious favour, We have absolved them of this
obligation. He, of a truth, is the Most Generous, the All-Bountiful.
115 Blessed is he who, at the hour of dawn, centring his thoughts on God,
occupied with His remembrance, and supplicating His forgiveness, directeth
his steps to the Mas̱ẖriqu’l-Aḏẖkár and, entering therein, seateth
himself in silence to listen to the verses of God, the Sovereign, the
Mighty, the All-Praised. Say: The Mas̱ẖriqu’l-Aḏẖkár is each and every
building which hath been erected in cities and villages for the
celebration of My praise. Such is the name by which it hath been
designated before the throne of glory, were ye of those who understand.
116 They who recite the verses of the All-Merciful in the most melodious
of tones will perceive in them that with which the sovereignty of earth
and heaven can never be compared. From them they will inhale the divine
fragrance of My worlds—worlds which today none can discern save those who
have been endowed with vision through this sublime, this beauteous
Revelation. Say: These verses draw hearts that are pure unto those
spiritual worlds that can neither be expressed in words nor intimated by
allusion. Blessed be those who hearken.
117 Assist ye, O My people, My chosen servants who have arisen to make
mention of Me among My creatures and to exalt My Word throughout My realm.
These, truly, are the stars of the heaven of My loving providence and the
lamps of My guidance unto all mankind. But he whose words conflict with
that which hath been sent down in My Holy Tablets is not of Me. Beware
lest ye follow any impious pretender. These Tablets are embellished with
the seal of Him Who causeth the dawn to appear, Who lifteth up His voice
between the heavens and the earth. Lay hold on this Sure Handle and on the
Cord of My mighty and unassailable Cause.
118 The Lord hath granted leave to whosoever desireth it that he be
instructed in the divers tongues of the world that he may deliver the
Message of the Cause of God throughout the East and throughout the West,
that he make mention of Him amidst the kindreds and peoples of the world
in such wise that hearts may revive and the mouldering bone be quickened.
119 It is inadmissible that man, who hath been endowed with reason, should
consume that which stealeth it away. Nay, rather it behoveth him to
comport himself in a manner worthy of the human station, and not in
accordance with the misdeeds of every heedless and wavering soul.
120 Adorn your heads with the garlands of trustworthiness and fidelity,
your hearts with the attire of the fear of God, your tongues with absolute
truthfulness, your bodies with the vesture of courtesy. These are in truth
seemly adornings unto the temple of man, if ye be of them that reflect.
Cling, O ye people of Bahá, to the cord of servitude unto God, the True
One, for thereby your stations shall be made manifest, your names written
and preserved, your ranks raised and your memory exalted in the Preserved
Tablet. Beware lest the dwellers on earth hinder you from this glorious
and exalted station. Thus have We exhorted you in most of Our Epistles and
now in this, Our Holy Tablet, above which hath beamed the Day-Star of the
Laws of the Lord, your God, the Powerful, the All-Wise.
121 When the ocean of My presence hath ebbed and the Book of My Revelation
is ended, turn your faces toward Him Whom God hath purposed, Who hath
branched from this Ancient Root.
122 Consider the pettiness of men’s minds. They ask for that which
injureth them, and cast away the thing that profiteth them. They are,
indeed, of those that are far astray. We find some men desiring liberty,
and priding themselves therein. Such men are in the depths of ignorance.
123 Liberty must, in the end, lead to sedition, whose flames none can
quench. Thus warneth you He Who is the Reckoner, the All-Knowing. Know ye
that the embodiment of liberty and its symbol is the animal. That which
beseemeth man is submission unto such restraints as will protect him from
his own ignorance, and guard him against the harm of the mischief-maker.
Liberty causeth man to overstep the bounds of propriety, and to infringe
on the dignity of his station. It debaseth him to the level of extreme
depravity and wickedness.
124 Regard men as a flock of sheep that need a shepherd for their
protection. This, verily, is the truth, the certain truth. We approve of
liberty in certain circumstances, and refuse to sanction it in others. We,
verily, are the All-Knowing.
125 Say: True liberty consisteth in man’s submission unto My commandments,
little as ye know it. Were men to observe that which We have sent down
unto them from the Heaven of Revelation, they would, of a certainty,
attain unto perfect liberty. Happy is the man that hath apprehended the
Purpose of God in whatever He hath revealed from the Heaven of His Will
that pervadeth all created things. Say: The liberty that profiteth you is
to be found nowhere except in complete servitude unto God, the Eternal
Truth. Whoso hath tasted of its sweetness will refuse to barter it for all
the dominion of earth and heaven.
126 In the Bayán it had been forbidden you to ask Us questions. The Lord
hath now relieved you of this prohibition, that ye may be free to ask what
you need to ask, but not such idle questions as those on which the men of
former times were wont to dwell. Fear God, and be ye of the righteous! Ask
ye that which shall be of profit to you in the Cause of God and His
dominion, for the portals of His tender compassion have been opened before
all who dwell in heaven and on earth.
127 The number of months in a year, appointed in the Book of God, is
nineteen. Of these the first hath been adorned with this Name which
overshadoweth the whole of creation.
128 The Lord hath decreed that the dead should be interred in coffins made
of crystal, of hard, resistant stone, or of wood that is both fine and
durable, and that graven rings should be placed upon their fingers. He,
verily, is the Supreme Ordainer, the One apprised of all.
129 The inscription on these rings should read, for men: "Unto God
belongeth all that is in the heavens and on the earth and whatsoever is
between them, and He, in truth, hath knowledge of all things"; and for
women: "Unto God belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth and
whatsoever is between them, and He, in truth, is potent over all things".
These are the verses that were revealed aforetime, but lo, the Point of
the Bayán now calleth out, exclaiming, "O Best-Beloved of the worlds!
Reveal Thou in their stead such words as will waft the fragrance of Thy
gracious favours over all mankind. We have announced unto everyone that
one single word from Thee excelleth all that hath been sent down in the
Bayán. Thou, indeed, hast power to do what pleaseth Thee. Deprive not Thy
servants of the overflowing bounties of the ocean of Thy mercy! Thou, in
truth, art He Whose grace is infinite." Behold, We have hearkened to His
call, and now fulfil His wish. He, verily, is the Best-Beloved, the
Answerer of prayers. If the following verse, which hath at this moment
been sent down by God, be engraved upon the burial-rings of both men and
women, it shall be better for them; We, of a certainty, are the Supreme
Ordainer: "I came forth from God, and return unto Him, detached from all
save Him, holding fast to His Name, the Merciful, the Compassionate." Thus
doth the Lord single out whomsoever He desireth for a bounty from His
presence. He is, in very truth, the God of might and power.
130 The Lord hath decreed, moreover, that the deceased should be enfolded
in five sheets of silk or cotton. For those whose means are limited a
single sheet of either fabric will suffice. Thus hath it been ordained by
Him Who is the All-Knowing, the All-Informed. It is forbidden you to
transport the body of the deceased a greater distance than one hour’s
journey from the city; rather should it be interred, with radiance and
serenity, in a nearby place.
131 God hath removed the restrictions on travel that had been imposed in
the Bayán. He, verily, is the Unconstrained; He doeth as He pleaseth and
ordaineth whatsoever He willeth.
132 O peoples of the world! Give ear unto the call of Him Who is the Lord
of Names, Who proclaimeth unto you from His habitation in the Most Great
Prison: "Verily, no God is there but Me, the Powerful, the Mighty, the
All-Subduing, the Most Exalted, the Omniscient, the All-Wise." In truth,
there is no God but Him, the Omnipotent Ruler of the worlds. Were it His
Will, He would, through but a single word proceeding from His presence,
lay hold on all mankind. Beware lest ye hesitate in your acceptance of
this Cause—a Cause before which the Concourse on high and the dwellers of
the Cities of Names have bowed down. Fear God, and be not of those who are
shut out as by a veil. Burn ye away the veils with the fire of My love,
and dispel ye the mists of vain imaginings by the power of this Name
through which We have subdued the entire creation.
133 Raise up and exalt the two Houses in the Twin Hallowed Spots, and the
other sites wherein the throne of your Lord, the All-Merciful, hath been
established. Thus commandeth you the Lord of every understanding heart.
134 Be watchful lest the concerns and preoccupations of this world prevent
you from observing that which hath been enjoined upon you by Him Who is
the Mighty, the Faithful. Be ye the embodiments of such steadfastness
amidst mankind that ye will not be kept back from God by the doubts of
those who disbelieved in Him when He manifested Himself, invested with a
mighty sovereignty. Take heed lest ye be prevented by aught that hath been
recorded in the Book from hearkening unto this, the Living Book, Who
proclaimeth the truth: "Verily, there is no God but Me, the Most
Excellent, the All-Praised." Look ye with the eye of equity upon Him Who
hath descended from the heaven of Divine will and power, and be not of
those who act unjustly.
135 Call then to mind these words which have streamed forth, in tribute to
this Revelation, from the Pen of Him Who was My Herald, and consider what
the hands of the oppressors have wrought throughout My days. Truly they
are numbered with the lost. He said: "Should ye attain the presence of Him
Whom We shall make manifest, beseech ye God, in His bounty, to grant that
He might deign to seat Himself upon your couches, for that act in itself
would confer upon you matchless and surpassing honour. Should He drink a
cup of water in your homes, this would be of greater consequence for you
than your proffering unto every soul, nay unto every created thing, the
water of its very life. Know this, O ye My servants!"
136 Such are the words with which My Forerunner hath extolled My Being,
could ye but understand. Whoso reflecteth upon these verses, and realizeth
what hidden pearls have been enshrined within them, will, by the
righteousness of God, perceive the fragrance of the All-Merciful wafting
from the direction of this Prison and will, with his whole heart, hasten
unto Him with such ardent longing that the hosts of earth and heaven would
be powerless to deter him. Say: This is a Revelation around which every
proof and testimony doth circle. Thus hath it been sent down by your Lord,
the God of Mercy, if ye be of them that judge aright. Say: This is the
very soul of all Scriptures which hath been breathed into the Pen of the
Most High, causing all created beings to be dumbfounded, save only those
who have been enraptured by the gentle breezes of My loving-kindness and
the sweet savours of My bounties which have pervaded the whole of
creation.
137 O people of the Bayán! Fear ye the Most Merciful and consider what He
hath revealed in another passage. He said: "The Qiblih is indeed He Whom
God will make manifest; whenever He moveth, it moveth, until He shall come
to rest." Thus was it set down by the Supreme Ordainer when He desired to
make mention of this Most Great Beauty. Meditate on this, O people, and be
not of them that wander distraught in the wilderness of error. If ye
reject Him at the bidding of your idle fancies, where then is the Qiblih
to which ye will turn, O assemblage of the heedless? Ponder ye this verse,
and judge equitably before God, that haply ye may glean the pearls of
mysteries from the ocean that surgeth in My Name, the All-Glorious, the
Most High.
138 Let none, in this Day, hold fast to aught save that which hath been
manifested in this Revelation. Such is the decree of God, aforetime and
hereafter—a decree wherewith the Scriptures of the Messengers of old have
been adorned. Such is the admonition of the Lord, aforetime and
hereafter—an admonition wherewith the preamble to the Book of Life hath
been embellished, did ye but perceive it. Such is the commandment of the
Lord, aforetime and hereafter; beware lest ye choose instead the part of
ignominy and abasement. Naught shall avail you in this Day but God, nor is
there any refuge to flee to save Him, the Omniscient, the All-Wise. Whoso
hath known Me hath known the Goal of all desire, and whoso hath turned
unto Me hath turned unto the Object of all adoration. Thus hath it been
set forth in the Book, and thus hath it been decreed by God, the Lord of
all worlds. To read but one of the verses of My Revelation is better than
to peruse the Scriptures of both the former and latter generations. This
is the Utterance of the All-Merciful, would that ye had ears to hear! Say:
This is the essence of knowledge, did ye but understand.
139 And now consider what hath been revealed in yet another passage, that
perchance ye may forsake your own concepts and set your faces towards God,
the Lord of being. He(4) hath said: "It is unlawful to enter into marriage
save with a believer in the Bayán. Should only one party to a marriage
embrace this Cause, his or her possessions will become unlawful to the
other, until such time as the latter hath converted. This law, however,
will only take effect after the exaltation of the Cause of Him Whom We
shall manifest in truth, or of that which hath already been made manifest
in justice. Ere this, ye are at liberty to enter into wedlock as ye wish,
that haply by this means ye may exalt the Cause of God." Thus hath the
Nightingale sung with sweet melody upon the celestial bough, in praise of
its Lord, the All-Merciful. Well is it with them that hearken.
140 O people of the Bayán, I adjure you by your Lord, the God of mercy, to
look with the eye of fairness upon this utterance which hath been sent
down through the power of truth, and not to be of those who see the
testimony of God yet reject and deny it. They, in truth, are of those who
will assuredly perish. The Point of the Bayán hath explicitly made mention
in this verse of the exaltation of My Cause before His own Cause; unto
this will testify every just and understanding mind. As ye can readily
witness in this day, its exaltation is such as none can deny save those
whose eyes are drunken in this mortal life and whom a humiliating
chastisement awaiteth in the life to come.
141 Say: By the righteousness of God! I, verily, am His(5) Best-Beloved;
and at this moment He listeneth to these verses descending from the Heaven
of Revelation and bewaileth the wrongs ye have committed in these days.
Fear God, and join not with the aggressor. Say: O people, should ye choose
to disbelieve in Him,(6) refrain at least from rising up against Him. By
God! Sufficient are the hosts of tyranny that are leagued against Him!
142 Verily, He(7) revealed certain laws so that, in this Dispensation, the
Pen of the Most High might have no need to move in aught but the
glorification of His own transcendent Station and His most effulgent
Beauty. Since, however, We have wished to evidence Our bounty unto you, We
have, through the power of truth, set forth these laws with clarity and
mitigated what We desire you to observe. He, verily, is the Munificent,
the Generous.
143 He(8) hath previously made known unto you that which would be uttered
by this Dayspring of Divine wisdom. He said, and He speaketh the truth:
"He(9) is the One Who will under all conditions proclaim: ‘Verily, there
is none other God besides Me, the One, the Incomparable, the Omniscient,
the All-Informed.’" This is a station which God hath assigned exclusively
to this sublime, this unique and wondrous Revelation. This is a token of
His bounteous favour, if ye be of them who comprehend, and a sign of His
irresistible decree. This is His Most Great Name, His Most Exalted Word,
and the Dayspring of His Most Excellent Titles, if ye could understand.
Nay more, through Him every Fountainhead, every Dawning-place of Divine
guidance is made manifest. Reflect, O people, on that which hath been sent
down in truth; ponder thereon, and be not of the transgressors.
144 Consort with all religions with amity and concord, that they may
inhale from you the sweet fragrance of God. Beware lest amidst men the
flame of foolish ignorance overpower you. All things proceed from God and
unto Him they return. He is the source of all things and in Him all things
are ended.
145 Take heed that ye enter no house in the absence of its owner, except
with his permission. Comport yourselves with propriety under all
conditions, and be not numbered with the wayward.
146 It hath been enjoined upon you to purify your means of sustenance and
other such things through payment of Zakát. Thus hath it been prescribed
in this exalted Tablet by Him Who is the Revealer of verses. We shall, if
it be God’s will and purpose, set forth erelong the measure of its
assessment. He, verily, expoundeth whatsoever He desireth by virtue of His
own knowledge, and He, of a truth, is Omniscient and All-Wise.
147 It is unlawful to beg, and it is forbidden to give to him who beggeth.
All have been enjoined to earn a living, and as for those who are
incapable of doing so, it is incumbent on the Deputies of God and on the
wealthy to make adequate provision for them. Keep ye the statutes and
commandments of God; nay, guard them as ye would your very eyes, and be
not of those who suffer grievous loss.
148 Ye have been forbidden in the Book of God to engage in contention and
conflict, to strike another, or to commit similar acts whereby hearts and
souls may be saddened. A fine of nineteen miṯẖqáls of gold had formerly
been prescribed by Him Who is the Lord of all mankind for anyone who was
the cause of sadness to another; in this Dispensation, however, He hath
absolved you thereof and exhorteth you to show forth righteousness and
piety. Such is the commandment which He hath enjoined upon you in this
resplendent Tablet. Wish not for others what ye wish not for yourselves;
fear God, and be not of the prideful. Ye are all created out of water, and
unto dust shall ye return. Reflect upon the end that awaiteth you, and
walk not in the ways of the oppressor. Give ear unto the verses of God
which He Who is the sacred Lote-Tree reciteth unto you. They are assuredly
the infallible balance, established by God, the Lord of this world and the
next. Through them the soul of man is caused to wing its flight towards
the Dayspring of Revelation, and the heart of every true believer is
suffused with light. Such are the laws which God hath enjoined upon you,
such His commandments prescribed unto you in His Holy Tablet; obey them
with joy and gladness, for this is best for you, did ye but know.
149 Recite ye the verses of God every morn and eventide. Whoso faileth to
recite them hath not been faithful to the Covenant of God and His
Testament, and whoso turneth away from these holy verses in this Day is of
those who throughout eternity have turned away from God. Fear ye God, O My
servants, one and all. Pride not yourselves on much reading of the verses
or on a multitude of pious acts by night and day; for were a man to read a
single verse with joy and radiance it would be better for him than to read
with lassitude all the Holy Books of God, the Help in Peril, the
Self-Subsisting. Read ye the sacred verses in such measure that ye be not
overcome by languor and despondency. Lay not upon your souls that which
will weary them and weigh them down, but rather what will lighten and
uplift them, so that they may soar on the wings of the Divine verses
towards the Dawning-place of His manifest signs; this will draw you nearer
to God, did ye but comprehend.
150 Teach your children the verses revealed from the heaven of majesty and
power, so that, in most melodious tones, they may recite the Tablets of
the All-Merciful in the alcoves within the Mas̱ẖriqu’l-Aḏẖkárs. Whoever
hath been transported by the rapture born of adoration for My Name, the
Most Compassionate, will recite the verses of God in such wise as to
captivate the hearts of those yet wrapped in slumber. Well is it with him
who hath quaffed the Mystic Wine of everlasting life from the utterance of
his merciful Lord in My Name—a Name through which every lofty and majestic
mountain hath been reduced to dust.
151 Ye have been enjoined to renew the furnishings of your homes after the
passing of each nineteen years; thus hath it been ordained by One Who is
Omniscient and All-Perceiving. He, verily, is desirous of refinement, both
for you yourselves and for all that ye possess; lay not aside the fear of
God and be not of the negligent. Whoso findeth that his means are
insufficient to this purpose hath been excused by God, the Ever-Forgiving,
the Most Bounteous.
152 Wash your feet once every day in summer, and once every three days
during winter.
153 Should anyone wax angry with you, respond to him with gentleness; and
should anyone upbraid you, forbear to upbraid him in return, but leave him
to himself and put your trust in God, the omnipotent Avenger, the Lord of
might and justice.
154 Ye have been prohibited from making use of pulpits. Whoso wisheth to
recite unto you the verses of his Lord, let him sit on a chair placed upon
a dais, that he may make mention of God, his Lord, and the Lord of all
mankind. It is pleasing to God that ye should seat yourselves on chairs
and benches as a mark of honour for the love ye bear for Him and for the
Manifestation of His glorious and resplendent Cause.
155 Gambling and the use of opium have been forbidden unto you. Eschew
them both, O people, and be not of those who transgress. Beware of using
any substance that induceth sluggishness and torpor in the human temple
and inflicteth harm upon the body. We, verily, desire for you naught save
what shall profit you, and to this bear witness all created things, had ye
but ears to hear.
156 Whensoever ye be invited to a banquet or festive occasion, respond
with joy and gladness, and whoever fulfilleth his promise will be safe
from reproof. This is a Day on which each of God’s wise decrees hath been
expounded.
157 Behold, the "mystery of the Great Reversal in the Sign of the
Sovereign" hath now been made manifest. Well is it with him whom God hath
aided to recognize the "Six" raised up by virtue of this "Upright Alif";
he, verily, is of those whose faith is true. How many the outwardly pious
who have turned away, and how many the wayward who have drawn nigh,
exclaiming: "All praise be to Thee, O Thou the Desire of the worlds!" In
truth, it is in the hand of God to give what He willeth to whomsoever He
willeth, and to withhold what He pleaseth from whomsoever He may wish. He
knoweth the inner secrets of the hearts and the meaning hidden in a
mocker’s wink. How many an embodiment of heedlessness who came unto Us
with purity of heart have We established upon the seat of Our acceptance;
and how many an exponent of wisdom have We in all justice consigned to the
fire. We are, in truth, the One to judge. He it is Who is the
manifestation of "God doeth whatsoever He pleaseth", and abideth upon the
throne of "He ordaineth whatsoever He chooseth".
158 Blessed is the one who discovereth the fragrance of inner meanings
from the traces of this Pen through whose movement the breezes of God are
wafted over the entire creation, and through whose stillness the very
essence of tranquillity appeareth in the realm of being. Glorified be the
All-Merciful, the Revealer of so inestimable a bounty. Say: Because He
bore injustice, justice hath appeared on earth, and because He accepted
abasement, the majesty of God hath shone forth amidst mankind.
159 It hath been forbidden you to carry arms unless essential, and
permitted you to attire yourselves in silk. The Lord hath relieved you, as
a bounty on His part, of the restrictions that formerly applied to
clothing and to the trim of the beard. He, verily, is the Ordainer, the
Omniscient. Let there be naught in your demeanour of which sound and
upright minds would disapprove, and make not yourselves the playthings of
the ignorant. Well is it with him who hath adorned himself with the
vesture of seemly conduct and a praiseworthy character. He is assuredly
reckoned with those who aid their Lord through distinctive and outstanding
deeds.
160 Promote ye the development of the cities of God and His countries, and
glorify Him therein in the joyous accents of His well-favoured ones. In
truth, the hearts of men are edified through the power of the tongue, even
as houses and cities are built up by the hand and other means. We have
assigned to every end a means for its accomplishment; avail yourselves
thereof, and place your trust and confidence in God, the Omniscient, the
All-Wise.
161 Blessed is the man that hath acknowledged his belief in God and in His
signs, and recognized that "He shall not be asked of His doings". Such a
recognition hath been made by God the ornament of every belief and its
very foundation. Upon it must depend the acceptance of every goodly deed.
Fasten your eyes upon it, that haply the whisperings of the rebellious may
not cause you to slip.
162 Were He to decree as lawful the thing which from time immemorial had
been forbidden, and forbid that which had, at all times, been regarded as
lawful, to none is given the right to question His authority. Whoso will
hesitate, though it be for less than a moment, should be regarded as a
transgressor.
163 Whoso hath not recognized this sublime and fundamental verity, and
hath failed to attain this most exalted station, the winds of doubt will
agitate him, and the sayings of the infidels will distract his soul. He
that hath acknowledged this principle will be endowed with the most
perfect constancy. All honour to this all-glorious station, the
remembrance of which adorneth every exalted Tablet. Such is the teaching
which God bestoweth on you, a teaching that will deliver you from all
manner of doubt and perplexity, and enable you to attain unto salvation in
both this world and in the next. He, verily, is the Ever-Forgiving, the
Most Bountiful. He it is Who hath sent forth the Messengers, and sent down
the Books to proclaim "There is none other God but Me, the Almighty, the
All-Wise".
164 O Land of Káf and Rá!(10) We, verily, behold thee in a state
displeasing unto God, and see proceeding from thee that which is
inscrutable to anyone save Him, the Omniscient, the All-Informed; and We
perceive that which secretly and stealthily diffuseth from thee. With Us
is the knowledge of all things, inscribed in a lucid Tablet. Sorrow not
for that which hath befallen thee. Erelong will God raise up within thee
men endued with mighty valour, who will magnify My Name with such
constancy that neither will they be deterred by the evil suggestions of
the divines, nor will they be kept back by the insinuations of the sowers
of doubt. With their own eyes will they behold God, and with their own
lives will they render Him victorious. These, truly, are of those who are
steadfast.
165 O concourse of divines! When My verses were sent down, and My clear
tokens were revealed, We found you behind the veils. This, verily, is a
strange thing. Ye glory in My Name, yet ye recognized Me not at the time
your Lord, the All-Merciful, appeared amongst you with proof and
testimony. We have rent the veils asunder. Beware lest ye shut out the
people by yet another veil. Pluck asunder the chains of vain imaginings,
in the name of the Lord of all men, and be not of the deceitful. Should ye
turn unto God and embrace His Cause, spread not disorder within it, and
measure not the Book of God with your selfish desires. This, verily, is
the counsel of God aforetime and hereafter, and to this God’s witnesses
and chosen ones, yea, each and every one of Us, do solemnly attest.
166 Call ye to mind the s̱ẖayḵẖ whose name was Muḥammad-Ḥasan, who
ranked among the most learned divines of his day. When the True One was
made manifest, this s̱ẖayḵẖ, along with others of his calling, rejected
Him, while a sifter of wheat and barley accepted Him and turned unto the
Lord. Though he was occupied both night and day in setting down what he
conceived to be the laws and ordinances of God, yet when He Who is the
Unconstrained appeared, not one letter thereof availed him, or he would
not have turned away from a Countenance that hath illumined the faces of
the well-favoured of the Lord. Had ye believed in God when He revealed
Himself, the people would not have turned aside from Him, nor would the
things ye witness today have befallen Us. Fear God, and be not of the
heedless.
167 Beware lest any name debar you from Him Who is the Possessor of all
names, or any word shut you out from this Remembrance of God, this Source
of Wisdom amongst you. Turn unto God and seek His protection, O concourse
of divines, and make not of yourselves a veil between Me and My creatures.
Thus doth your Lord admonish you, and command you to be just, lest your
works should come to naught and ye yourselves be oblivious of your plight.
Shall he who denieth this Cause be able to vindicate the truth of any
cause throughout creation? Nay, by Him Who is the Fashioner of the
universe! Yet the people are wrapped in a palpable veil. Say: Through this
Cause the day-star of testimony hath dawned, and the luminary of proof
hath shed its radiance upon all that dwell on earth. Fear God, O men of
insight, and be not of those who disbelieve in Me. Take heed lest the word
"Prophet" withhold you from this Most Great Announcement, or any reference
to "Vicegerency" debar you from the sovereignty of Him Who is the
Vicegerent of God, which overshadoweth all the worlds. Every name hath
been created by His Word, and every cause is dependent on His
irresistible, His mighty and wondrous Cause. Say: This is the Day of God,
the Day on which naught shall be mentioned save His own Self, the
omnipotent Protector of all worlds. This is the Cause that hath made all
your superstitions and idols to tremble.
168 We, verily, see amongst you him who taketh hold of the Book of God and
citeth from it proofs and arguments wherewith to repudiate his Lord, even
as the followers of every other Faith sought reasons in their Holy Books
for refuting Him Who is the Help in Peril, the Self-Subsisting. Say: God,
the True One, is My witness that neither the Scriptures of the world, nor
all the books and writings in existence, shall, in this Day, avail you
aught without this, the Living Book, Who proclaimeth in the midmost heart
of creation: "Verily, there is none other God but Me, the All-Knowing, the
All-Wise."
169 O concourse of divines! Beware lest ye be the cause of strife in the
land, even as ye were the cause of the repudiation of the Faith in its
early days. Gather the people around this Word that hath made the pebbles
to cry out: "The Kingdom is God’s, the Dawning-place of all signs!" Thus
doth your Lord admonish you, as a bounty on His part; He, of a truth, is
the Ever-Forgiving, the Most Generous.
170 Call ye to mind Karím, and how, when We summoned him unto God, he
waxed disdainful, prompted by his own desires; yet We had sent him that
which was a solace to the eye of proof in the world of being and the
fulfilment of God’s testimony to all the denizens of earth and heaven. As
a token of the grace of Him Who is the All-Possessing, the Most High, We
bade him embrace the Truth. But he turned away until, as an act of justice
from God, angels of wrath laid hold upon him. Unto this We truly were a
witness.
171 Tear the veils asunder in such wise that the inmates of the Kingdom
will hear them being rent. This is the command of God, in days gone by and
for those to come. Blessed the man that observeth that whereunto he was
bidden, and woe betide the negligent.
172 We, of a certainty, have had no purpose in this earthly realm save to
make God manifest and to reveal His sovereignty; sufficient unto Me is God
for a witness. We, of a certainty, have had no intent in the celestial
Kingdom but to exalt His Cause and glorify His praise; sufficient unto Me
is God for a protector. We, of a certainty, have had no desire in the
Dominion on high except to extol God and what hath been sent down by Him;
sufficient unto Me is God for a helper.
173 Happy are ye, O ye the learned ones in Bahá. By the Lord! Ye are the
billows of the Most Mighty Ocean, the stars of the firmament of Glory, the
standards of triumph waving betwixt earth and heaven. Ye are the
manifestations of steadfastness amidst men and the daysprings of Divine
Utterance to all that dwell on earth. Well is it with him that turneth
unto you, and woe betide the froward. This day, it behoveth whoso hath
quaffed the Mystic Wine of everlasting life from the Hands of the
loving-kindness of the Lord his God, the Merciful, to pulsate even as the
throbbing artery in the body of mankind, that through him may be quickened
the world and every crumbling bone.
174 O people of the world! When the Mystic Dove will have winged its
flight from its Sanctuary of Praise and sought its far-off goal, its
hidden habitation, refer ye whatsoever ye understand not in the Book to
Him Who hath branched from this mighty Stock.
175 O Pen of the Most High! Move Thou upon the Tablet at the bidding of
Thy Lord, the Creator of the Heavens, and tell of the time when He Who is
the Dayspring of Divine Unity purposed to direct His steps towards the
School of Transcendent Oneness; haply the pure in heart may gain thereby a
glimpse, be it as small as a needle’s eye, of the mysteries of Thy Lord,
the Almighty, the Omniscient, that lie concealed behind the veils. Say:
We, indeed, set foot within the School of inner meaning and explanation
when all created things were unaware. We saw the words sent down by Him
Who is the All-Merciful, and We accepted the verses of God, the Help in
Peril, the Self-Subsisting, which He(11) presented unto Us, and hearkened
unto that which He had solemnly affirmed in the Tablet. This we assuredly
did behold. And We assented to His wish through Our behest, for truly We
are potent to command.
176 O people of the Bayán! We, verily, set foot within the School of God
when ye lay slumbering; and We perused the Tablet while ye were fast
asleep. By the one true God! We read the Tablet ere it was revealed, while
ye were unaware, and We had perfect knowledge of the Book when ye were yet
unborn. These words are to your measure, not to God’s. To this testifieth
that which is enshrined within His knowledge, if ye be of them that
comprehend; and to this the tongue of the Almighty doth bear witness, if
ye be of those who understand. I swear by God, were We to lift the veil,
ye would be dumbfounded.
177 Take heed that ye dispute not idly concerning the Almighty and His
Cause, for lo! He hath appeared amongst you invested with a Revelation so
great as to encompass all things, whether of the past or of the future.
Were We to address Our theme by speaking in the language of the inmates of
the Kingdom, We would say: "In truth, God created that School ere He
created heaven and earth, and We entered it before the letters B and E
were joined and knit together." Such is the language of Our servants in
Our Kingdom; consider what the tongue of the dwellers of Our exalted
Dominion would utter, for We have taught them Our knowledge and have
revealed to them whatever had lain hidden in God’s wisdom. Imagine then
what the Tongue of Might and Grandeur would utter in His All-Glorious
Abode!
178 This is not a Cause which may be made a plaything for your idle
fancies, nor is it a field for the foolish and faint of heart. By God,
this is the arena of insight and detachment, of vision and upliftment,
where none may spur on their chargers save the valiant horsemen of the
Merciful, who have severed all attachment to the world of being. These,
truly, are they that render God victorious on earth, and are the
dawning-places of His sovereign might amidst mankind.
179 Beware lest aught that hath been revealed in the Bayán should keep you
from your Lord, the Most Compassionate. God is My witness that the Bayán
was sent down for no other purpose than to celebrate My praise, did ye but
know! In it the pure in heart will find only the fragrance of My love,
only My Name that overshadoweth all that seeth and is seen. Say: Turn ye,
O people, unto that which hath proceeded from My Most Exalted Pen. Should
ye inhale therefrom the fragrance of God, set not yourselves against Him,
nor deny yourselves a portion of His gracious favour and His manifold
bestowals. Thus doth your Lord admonish you; He, verily, is the
Counsellor, the Omniscient.
180 Whatsoever ye understand not in the Bayán, ask it of God, your Lord
and the Lord of your forefathers. Should He so desire, He will expound for
you that which is revealed therein, and disclose to you the pearls of
Divine knowledge and wisdom that lie concealed within the ocean of its
words. He, verily, is supreme over all names; no God is there but Him, the
Help in Peril, the Self-Subsisting.
181 The world’s equilibrium hath been upset through the vibrating
influence of this most great, this new World Order. Mankind’s ordered life
hath been revolutionized through the agency of this unique, this wondrous
System—the like of which mortal eyes have never witnessed.
182 Immerse yourselves in the ocean of My words, that ye may unravel its
secrets, and discover all the pearls of wisdom that lie hid in its depths.
Take heed that ye do not vacillate in your determination to embrace the
truth of this Cause—a Cause through which the potentialities of the might
of God have been revealed, and His sovereignty established. With faces
beaming with joy, hasten ye unto Him. This is the changeless Faith of God,
eternal in the past, eternal in the future. Let him that seeketh, attain
it; and as to him that hath refused to seek it—verily, God is
Self-Sufficient, above any need of His creatures.
183 Say: This is the infallible Balance which the Hand of God is holding,
in which all who are in the heavens and all who are on the earth are
weighed, and their fate determined, if ye be of them that believe and
recognize this truth. Say: This is the Most Great Testimony, by which the
validity of every proof throughout the ages hath been established, would
that ye might be assured thereof. Say: Through it the poor have been
enriched, the learned enlightened, and the seekers enabled to ascend unto
the presence of God. Beware lest ye make it a cause of dissension amongst
you. Be ye as firmly settled as the immovable mountain in the Cause of
your Lord, the Mighty, the Loving.
184 Say: O source of perversion! Abandon thy wilful blindness, and speak
forth the truth amidst the people. I swear by God that I have wept for
thee to see thee following thy selfish passions and renouncing Him Who
fashioned thee and brought thee into being. Call to mind the tender mercy
of thy Lord, and remember how We nurtured thee by day and by night for
service to the Cause. Fear God, and be thou of the truly repentant.
Granted that the people were confused about thy station, is it conceivable
that thou thyself art similarly confused? Tremble before thy Lord and
recall the days when thou didst stand before Our throne, and didst write
down the verses that We dictated unto thee—verses sent down by God, the
Omnipotent Protector, the Lord of might and power. Beware lest the fire of
thy presumptuousness debar thee from attaining to God’s Holy Court. Turn
unto Him, and fear not because of thy deeds. He, in truth, forgiveth
whomsoever He desireth as a bounty on His part; no God is there but Him,
the Ever-Forgiving, the All-Bounteous. We admonish thee solely for the
sake of God. Shouldst thou accept this counsel, thou wilt have acted to
thine own behoof; and shouldst thou reject it, thy Lord, verily, can well
dispense with thee, and with all those who, in manifest delusion, have
followed thee. Behold! God hath laid hold on him who led thee astray.
Return unto God, humble, submissive and lowly; verily, He will put away
from thee thy sins, for thy Lord, of a certainty, is the Forgiving, the
Mighty, the All-Merciful.
185 This is the Counsel of God; would that thou mightest heed it! This is
the Bounty of God; would that thou mightest receive it! This is the
Utterance of God; if only thou wouldst apprehend it! This is the Treasure
of God; if only thou couldst understand!
186 This is a Book which hath become the Lamp of the Eternal unto the
world, and His straight, undeviating Path amidst the peoples of the earth.
Say: This is the Dayspring of Divine knowledge, if ye be of them that
understand, and the Dawning-place of God’s commandments, if ye be of those
who comprehend.
187 Burden not an animal with more than it can bear. We, truly, have
prohibited such treatment through a most binding interdiction in the Book.
Be ye the embodiments of justice and fairness amidst all creation.
188 Should anyone unintentionally take another’s life, it is incumbent
upon him to render to the family of the deceased an indemnity of one
hundred miṯẖqáls of gold. Observe ye that which hath been enjoined upon
you in this Tablet, and be not of those who overstep its limits.
189 O members of parliaments throughout the world! Select ye a single
language for the use of all on earth, and adopt ye likewise a common
script. God, verily, maketh plain for you that which shall profit you and
enable you to be independent of others. He, of a truth, is the Most
Bountiful, the All-Knowing, the All-Informed. This will be the cause of
unity, could ye but comprehend it, and the greatest instrument for
promoting harmony and civilization, would that ye might understand! We
have appointed two signs for the coming of age of the human race: the
first, which is the most firm foundation, We have set down in other of Our
Tablets, while the second hath been revealed in this wondrous Book.
190 It hath been forbidden you to smoke opium. We, truly, have prohibited
this practice through a most binding interdiction in the Book. Should
anyone partake thereof, assuredly he is not of Me. Fear God, O ye endued
with understanding!
